A Global Gauge Finds Progress Against Poverty
December 14, 2014 Sunday
While many Americans typically focus on the ups and downs of the national economy, something remarkable has been occurring among the world's poorest nations. In just over two decades, the number of people living in extreme poverty has been almost halved.
The World Bank defines extreme poverty as a living standard supported by less than $1.25 a day, or $38 a month, in 2005 dollars. This is a very low threshold, and people with considerably more money than that are living very difficult lives. Still, using this measure, there is some excellent news: From 1990 to 2011, nearly a billion people around the world rose above abject poverty. 
  That's not to say extreme poverty has ended. According to the World Bank's analysis, there are still roughly one billion people whose total income is below that threshold -- a level of material deprivation that many in the developed world can scarcely imagine.
  Defining extreme poverty across different countries and cultures presents many problems. The World Bank's figure is widely but not universally accepted. Other organizations, such as the Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative, use a calculation method that puts the number of people living in abject poverty at 1.6 billion. Still, there is agreement that extreme poverty has been on the decline since the mid-1990s and that the decline has accelerated since 2000. 
  What's behind the shift? Rising incomes in India and China are a major factor. Together, those two countries lifted 232 million people out of extreme poverty from 2008 to 2011 alone, according to the World Bank analysis. India, however, also faces the biggest challenge: It accounts for 30 percent of all people still living in extreme poverty. 
  At current growth rates, the World Bank predicts that in 15 or so years, the income of a vast majority of the world's destitute people will rise above the extreme-poverty threshold. That may be only a start, but it's an enormous improvement. 