At the U.N., a Free-for-All on Setting Global Goals
May 7, 2014 Wednesday
What should the world's priorities be? Is the most urgent task to guarantee everybody a minimum standard of subsistence? To reduce inequality? To combat global warming, perhaps at the expense of economic growth?
Should the world even have a common set of goals?
It looks as if it's well on the way to getting them. For the 11th time in just over a year, scores of diplomats from around the world are gathering this week at the United Nations to continue fine-tuning a vast wish list of national priorities into a tight set of humankind's most pressing challenges.
By summer they are expected to produce a finished list of 10 or so, to be anointed by the United Nations General Assembly next year as the Sustainable Development Goals, intended to be a focus of global attention and resources over the following 15 years.
''The S.D.G.s will provide the overarching narrative or explanation about how to make the world function adequately for its inhabitants and for the next generation,'' said Jeffrey D. Sachs, a noted development economist at Columbia University, who heads a group of experts advising the United Nations on the goals.
But for all the good intentions, the breathtakingly ambitious enterprise might have a hard time overcoming not just the narrower priorities of the world's nation-states but also natural skepticism about the value of such development goals.
The new crop of objectives is meant to succeed the eight Millennium Development Goals the United Nations set in 2000. Supporters like Professor Sachs argue that such goal-setting has helped draw resources to make progress on intractable problems that were often ignored in the past.
But the new batch faces extra hurdles. It is much more ambitious. The list so far includes 16 goals, with some 140 specific targets, aimed not merely at helping the poor but at saving the entire world.
Goals include mitigating climate change, guaranteeing industrialization and good jobs for all, and promoting peaceful societies and the rule of law. Meeting them might seem like a stretch, considering that so many poor countries failed to reach the last ones, which aimed at straightforward targets like alleviating poverty and reducing infant and maternal mortality.
The other problem is that unlike 15 years ago -- when the United Nations secretary general then, Kofi Annan, simply put together a list -- this time around, everybody has a say.
''The tent is very large, and everyone is in it,'' a diplomat from a rich developed country told me, speaking on the condition of anonymity to discuss a touchy diplomatic issue. ''Priorities differ, agendas differ. The willingness to take on commitments differs.''
Rich countries think good governance and peaceful societies are an essential part of the package. Many poor countries, by contrast, believe they are -- as noted in a statement from Brazil and Nicaragua -- a ''distraction from the basic social, economic and environmental challenges that we must address'' and things rich countries can use as conditions to release aid.
Among developing countries, many big ones, like China and India, are more worried about maintaining robust economic growth than about combating climate change. Island nations like the Maldives, which lies less than six feet above sea level, worry more about what rising temperatures will do to the sea.
''There is a north-south divide and divides between countries in the north and in the south,'' a diplomat from a poor developing country told me. ''It's a very tiring process.''
There are, of course, better and worse ideas. Bjorn Lomborg of the Copenhagen Consensus, who achieved renown by arguing that current efforts to cut carbon emissions to slow climate change cost too much and deliver too little, argues that many of the new targets also fail the test.
He has been making the rounds among diplomats, showing them the results of cost-benefit analyses of some of the ideas on the table: Phasing out fossil fuel subsidies and removing barriers to women's employment are ''phenomenal'' ideas, likely to deliver benefits that are at least 15 times as great as their costs. Eliminating drug abuse, doubling the global share of renewable energy by 2030 and achieving protection of agricultural biodiversity are either ambiguous or would cost more than their expected benefits.
''These goals are going to mobilize up to $700 billion in resources,'' Mr. Lomborg told me. ''If we can just get one poor target replaced by one phenomenal target, we can generate billions in benefits.''
The tension over the new set of global objectives extends beyond the quality of the individual goals, however. The deepest disagreements are over who will shoulder the burden of achieving them. Who will provide the money? How much? On what terms will the technology transfer from rich to poor occur? ''Everything that has to do with the 'how' is controversial,'' the rich-country diplomat told me.
This kind of tension is not unique to these Sustainable Development Goals. From global trade to climate change, it comes up every time countries swap and apportion rights and responsibilities. It is probably easier to overcome in a debate over aspirational objectives like the S.D.G.s than in more bare-knuckled negotiations over things like limits on carbon emissions.
Still, such divergent views highlight an essential question: Can common targets actually push development forward?
William Easterly, a development economist at New York University, is one of the profession's most determined skeptics. Global development experts, he says, mistake development for an engineering problem that experts like themselves can correctly identify and address.
In the real world, Professor Easterly says, development occurs as people identify problems and push for solutions through their political systems. Setting global goals that nobody is truly accountable for achieving not only misrepresents what causes poverty but also substitutes goal-setting for real action.
The initial development goals, he says, were just ''a brilliant campaign by the U.N. to get a bigger seat at the table,'' muscling into turf that until then had been the domain of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Arvind Subramanian, a development economist at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, shares a similar perspective. While there are crucial challenges that call for international collaboration (climate change, new vaccines for diseases of the developing world and technologies to advance agricultural productivity in Africa come to mind), problems like poor education, malnutrition and poverty are invariably addressed by action within each individual country. Foreign aid is not the right tool to address them.
''Collective action in this day and age has become much more difficult,'' Mr. Subramanian told me. ''We should reserve it for the very big challenges of providing global public goods. It's nonsense to spend it on eliminating poverty in Burundi.''
Professor Sachs disagrees. For him, the mobilization of resources by the Millennium Development Goals for combating AIDS and malaria in Africa was more significant than the fact that the continent didn't achieve many of the goals. ''Even if they didn't do everything one hoped for,'' he said, ''they created an energy, a drive, an organizational knowledge, an interest in community action.''
Yet even Professor Sachs wonders whether almost 200 countries can fit their priorities into a meaningful set of actionable goals.
''There's cooperation now,'' he said. ''But actually doing something about the hard issues remains an open question.''