Home Improvement
April 13, 2014 Sunday
THE BRIGHT CONTINENTBreaking Rules and Making Change in Modern Africa
By Dayo OlopadeIllustrated. 272 pp. Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. $26.
When my family moved to Accra, Ghana, in 1990 just as I was about to start high school, we landed in a country whose G.D.P. was less than one-quarter the size of Delaware's, despite its plentiful deposits of gold and other precious minerals. A military dictator had ruled it for almost a dozen years. Poverty, hunger and disease stalked the countryside. It felt like a place cut off from the rest of the world. If we wanted to call my grandparents in Wisconsin or Addis Ababa, all five of us would squeeze into a phone booth at the post office. We didn't have a home phone, and the waiting list to get one was decades long.
When I returned to Ghana as a correspondent for The New York Times in 2005, I found a thriving democracy that had peacefully handed power between rival political parties. Everyone seemed to have a chirping cellphone. Ghanaians who had made it in the West as software developers, bankers and doctors were flocking home to set up businesses, building beach houses on the Atlantic coastline and launching Afrocentric clothing companies. Today Ghana is on the cusp of becoming a middle-income country -- not too shabby a leap in less than a quarter of a century.
Despite what we read in the news about war, famine and corruption on the continent, anyone who looks beyond the headlines knows that this trajectory -- from brutal misrule and abysmal poverty toward democracy and prosperity -- has been the lived experience of most ­Africans.
And so Dayo Olopade's ''Bright Continent,'' as its title suggests, is a corrective to Africa's image as a dark, hopeless place. In fact, it is home to several of the world's fastest-growing economies and more than a billion would-be consumers, an increasing number of whom are reaching toward middle-class status. It is also home to a huge chunk of the world's natural wealth, though that accounts for a smaller sliver of the continent's overall growth than most people think.
Africa's gains have come not because of Western largess or painful structural adjustment programs set out by the likes of the International Monetary Fund, Olopade argues, nor are they the work of governments. They are largely the fruit of Africans' efforts to help themselves, through creative means that sometimes involve breaking the rules.
''It turns out we have been throwing a party in an empty ballroom,'' Olopade, a Nigerian-American journalist, writes of Western-led efforts to aid Africa. ''One of the biggest problems with the world's longtime orientation toward Africa is a preference for interactions between governments, or between formal institutions, when the most vibrant, authentic and economically significant interactions are between individuals and decentralized groups.''
She excavates a hopeful narrative about a continent on the rise, ''a libertarian celebration of hustling, hacking and free-form development.''
The best solutions, according to Olopade, are local, developed by people closest to the problem, not bureaucrats in Washington or Brussels: the South African gynecologist who operates out of two shipping containers stacked together, the Kenyan family who take over an abandoned plot of land to grow vegetables to eat and sell.
Central to Olopade's thesis is the concept of kanju, a term that describes ''the specific creativity born from African difficulty.'' It is the rule-bending ethos that makes it possible to get things done in the face of headaches like crumbling infrastructure, corrupt bureaucracy and tightfisted banks unwilling to make loans to people without political connections.
Many countries have these kinds of hacks and workarounds. In India, the term is jugaad, and it has had its moment in the sun as a business school concept. India runs on this informal hacking of the system that makes life and business ­possible.
But the problems India is facing after a decade of spectacular growth reveal the limits of jugaad, and contribute to my unease with the premise of this book. Basic problems like educating millions of people, giving them safe drinking water and making sure they have food cannot be solved by hacking the system; change on that scale requires changing the system.
''The Bright Continent'' resists broad-brush solutions when imposed from outside, and is largely dismissive of the role of governments in transforming the continent. But transformation tends to come when people push powerful institutions to change.
Take the example of Kayode Fayemi, the governor of Ekiti, the home state of Olopade's family. Fayemi is one of her story's heroes for his efforts to stamp out corruption and make government more effective and accountable.
He ran for governor in 2007, but the election was flagrantly rigged. For three and a half years he fought in the courts to get that false result overturned. He didn't try to work around a corrupt system; he forced the system to do its job properly. Eventually he prevailed and was sworn in, and his example has given hope to other would-be politicians that they can fight and win.
The book is full of TED-talk-ready phrases. Countries are not rich or poor, developed or underdeveloped, they are ''fat'' and ''lean.'' With their shoddy infrastructures, lumbering bureaucracies and corrupt politicians, many African countries are not failed states but ''fail'' states that do not provide the basics to their citizens, with ''the basic understanding that you are on your own.''
These insights start out sounding clever, but by the time kanju is referred to as a ''killer app'' they have begun to grate. This is neither wholly a reporter's book (its tone is too boosterish) nor a business book (it is too well reported).
Indeed, it is something in between. Things like close family ties, necessity-driven innovation and ingenuity are a source of strength, Olopade writes, and gives countless examples. But in each case, the opposite can also be true.
Family ties are a tremendous source of strength in many African societies, but family ties can also hold people back. In places where so few people have jobs, one earner must support many mouths, making it impossible to save anything. A journalist I know in the Central African Republic once told me that he hasn't been able to save any money, send his children to university or start a business because every spare bit of cash goes to a needy relative. For my friend, family was a drag on his upward mobility, not a boost.
In the end, Olopade endorses NGOs, but chooses ones that are more closely connected to the needs of people. These are small-bore efforts, aimed at solving a particular problem. The African Leadership Academy, started by a Ghanaian named Fred Swaniker, is praised, but it takes only 100 students a year.
This book doesn't really address the question that nags many scholars and analysts. Rapid growth in Africa has not been accompanied by rapid expansion of employment opportunities, which means that many people, especially the young and least educated, are left to hope that a rising tide will lift their boats.
Precarious employment in what is known as the informal sector is what most young Africans can expect. The textile factories and steel mills that built middle classes from Europe to the United States to China and beyond are nowhere on the horizon in most African economies.
More broadly, as Fayemi's experience shows, the most thoroughgoing change in any society is almost always political. Giving people a voice through their elected officials to transform their societies is the most empowering change of all, but in Olopade's world, government is a millstone to progress, not its engine.