China on the Rise, While America Pulls Back; Letters
June 6, 2017 Tuesday 00:00 EST
To the Editor:
Re “China’s Trillion-Dollar Foreign Policy” (editorial, May 18):
It is with great sadness and concern that I have seen the United States retreat so dramatically from international involvement.
I salute China not only for continuing its climate change leadership, but also for doing what the United States should join it in doing, by assisting development in the developing countries of Africa, Asia and Latin America as prescribed in the Sustainable Development Goals unanimously adopted by the General Assembly.
I recognize that China’s efforts are not entirely altruistic, reaping both economic and political advantages for that country’s future. And China is sometimes exploitative of labor and the environment in the countries it purports to help. United States involvement in the United Nations and with China could help establish development norms to alleviate these situations.
By forfeiting active international involvements and thinking only of short-term American-oriented policies, the United States forfeits its global stature, influence and participation in the economic advantages of a developing world.
RICHARD L. OTTINGER
WHITE PLAINS
The writer, a former member of Congress from New York, is dean emeritus of Pace Law School.
To the Editor:
Re “America in Retreat” (editorial, June 4):
I agree with your overall point. But one sentence is grating. You say, “The world still hasn’t figured out how to manage China’s rise.”
Since 1980, China’s economic reforms have spurred 700 million of its people to rise out of poverty, with per capita yearly income skyrocketing from $300 to more than $8,000 — all without the direction of foreign governments.
Why should “the world” manage China’s rise? As long as China is not invading other countries or massing troops on its borders, why should we even think that we can or should manage its rise?
China is expanding its influence through trade and infrastructure loans. That’s the kind of behavior we should be applauding, not managing.