It's an Unequal World. It Doesn't Have to Be.
December 18, 2017 Monday
Global inequality, after widening for decades, has stabilized. The share of the world's income captured by the top 1 percent
has shrunk since its peak on the eve of the financial crisis. The bottom half of the population is reaping its biggest share of 
  the global pie since Ronald Reagan was elected president of the United States.
  Inequality Stalls
  But here's the bad news: The respite probably won't last. Despite rapid strides among developing economies like China and India, which have been closing the income gap with the world's richer nations, growing inequality within almost every country will drive a further concentration of income around the globe.
  Examining the ''World Inequality Report'' -- published Thursday by the creators of the World Wealth and Income Database, who include the economists Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez -- it is tempting to see the rising concentration of incomes as some sort of unstoppable force of nature, an economic inevitability driven by globalization and technology. The report finds that the richest 1percent of humanity reaped 27 percent of the world's income between 1980 and 2016. The bottom 50 percent, by contrast, got only 12 percent.
  Nowhere has the distribution of the pie become more equitable. In China, 15 percent of the income growth since 1980 flowed to the richest 1 percent of Chinese while 13 percent flowed to the bottom  half. Even in egalitarian, social-democratic Europe, 1-percenters got 18 percent of the growth in the period. The bottom half got 14 percent. And among the more unequal regions of the world -- the United States, say, or Russia -- income disparities are reaching levels not before seen in modern history: The bottom half of Americans captured only 3 percent of total growth since 1980. The income of the bottom half of Russians actually shrank.
  Diverging Patterns And yet, a careful examination of the data suggests there is nothing inevitable about untrammelled inequality. Take China and India, developing countries of billion-plus populations playing catch-up to pull  themselves out of poverty. Incomes have become much more concentrated in both. But China's economic strategy has delivered much more growth at a lower cost in terms of economic disparity. Comparing Europe with the United States and Canada offers similar contrasts. Policy, it turns out, matters. More aggressive redistribution through taxes and transfers has spared Europe from the acute disparities that Americans have grown used to. Unequal access to education is helping reproduce inequality in the United States down the generations. On theother end of the spectrum of development, China's strategy based on low-skill manufacturing for export, and underpinned by aggressive investment in infrastructure, has proven more effective at raising living standards for the bottom half of the population than India's more inward-looking strategy, which has limited the benefits of globalization to the well-educated elite.Where is global inequality going? Policy choices -- about taxes and  education, employment rules and finance regulations -- will play a big role in shaping how countries around the world distribute the spoils of growth in the future. But the most powerful force driving the distribution  of income on a worldwide scale will be raw economic growth: If  economic catch-up by developing nations shrinks the income gap  between rich and poor countries faster than inequality increases inside  each country, the global disparity of income will narrow.  How World Income Grows The Future of Inequality Global inequality, after widening for decades, has stabilized. The share of the world's income captured by the top 1 percent  has shrunk since its peak on the eve of the financial crisis. The bottom half of the population is reaping its biggest share of the global pie since Ronald Reagan was elected president of the United States.
  But here's the bad news: The respite probably won't last. Despite  rapid strides among developing economies like China and India,  which have been closing the income gap with the world's richer  nations, growing inequality within almost every country will drive a  further concentration of income around the globe. Examining the ''World Inequality Report'' -- published Thursday  by the creators of the World Wealth and Income Database, who  include the economists Thomas Piketty and Emmanuel Saez -- it is  tempting to see the rising concentration of incomes as some sort of  unstoppable force of nature, an economic inevitability driven by  globalization and technology. The report finds that the richest 1  percent of humanity reaped 27 percent of the world's income between  1980 and 2016. The bottom 50 percent, by contrast, got only 12  percent.
  Nowhere has the distribution of the pie become more equitable. In  China, 15 percent of the income growth since 1980 flowed to the  richest 1 percent of Chinese while 13 percent flowed to the bottom  half. Even in egalitarian, social-democratic Europe, 1-percenters got  18 percent of the growth in the period. The bottom half got 14 percent. And among the more unequal regions of the world -- the United States, say, or Russia -- income disparities are reaching levels not before seen in modern history: The bottom half of Americans captured only 3 percent of total growth since 1980. The income of the  bottom half of Russians actually shrank.  And yet, a careful examination of the data suggests there is nothing  inevitable about untrammelled inequality. Take China and India, developing  countries of billion-plus populations playing catch-up to pull  themselves out of poverty. Incomes have become much more concentrated  in both. But China's economic strategy has delivered much more  growth at a lower cost in terms of economic disparity. Comparing  Europe with the United States and Canada offers similar contrasts.  Policy, it turns out, matters. More aggressive redistribution through  taxes and transfers has spared Europe from the acute disparities that  Americans have grown used to. Unequal access to education is helping  reproduce inequality in the United States down the generations. On the  other end of the spectrum of development, China's strategy based on  low-skill manufacturing for export, and underpinned by aggressive  investment in infrastructure, has proven more effective at raising  living standards for the bottom half of the population than India's more  inward-looking strategy, which has limited the benefits of globalization  to the well-educated elite.  Where is global inequality going? Policy choices -- about taxes and  education, employment rules and finance regulations -- will play a big  role in shaping how countries around the world distribute the spoils of  growth in the future. But the most powerful force driving the distribution  of income on a worldwide scale will be raw economic growth: If  economic catch-up by developing nations shrinks the income gap  between rich and poor countries faster than inequality increases inside  each country, the global disparity of income will narrow.
  The question is, how fast can developing  countries grow in the future? The answer, unfortunately,  is not fast enough. If China's furious  economic growth over the last couple of decades  was not enough to bring about a more equitable  distribution of income on a global scale, it seems  hard to imagine the kind of economic miracle  that could shrink the worldwide income gap.  China's economic miracle was an unprecedented  feat: In one generation, an unproductive  communist nation of farmers transformed itself  into a manufacturing export colossus, a giant of  capitalism. Since 1980, its share of the world's  income has grown to 19 percent from 3 percent.  Its income per person has grown almost 15 times  as fast as that of the United States and Canada,  and almost 19 times as fast as that of the  European Union -- to 90 percent of the world average, from 15 percent. Once at the bottom of  the world's income distribution, Chinese are now  much more broadly represented across the  spectrum of the world's income.
  China's rising income was pretty much the  only force pushing for a more equitable share of  the spoils of growth, holding world inequality  down even as the incomes of the world's biggest  earners surged ahead and workers in the industrialized  world mostly got stuck. And yet it  wasn't enough.
  As China has become richer and its growth  has slowed, its impact on how the world's income  pie is sliced is likely to be mixed: Once the  income of the average Chinese exceeds the world  average, China's fast growth will start adding to  inequality, rather than mitigating it. And it seems  implausible that India and sub-Saharan Africa,  today at the bottom of the world's income distribution,  will experience anything in the coming
  three decades like what China experienced in the  last three.
  Will poor countries make sufficient progress  relative to their rich peers to bring more  balance to the distribution of global income? Or  will rising inequality within countries  dominate? It depends on three forces:  countries' economic and population growth, as  well as the evolution of inequality within them.  The World Inequality Report takes a shot at  projecting these forces, drawing from economic  forecasts by the Organization for Economic  Cooperation and Development, population  projections from the United Nations and the  evolution of inequality in each country over 36  years. If you care about equity, it doesn't look  good.  If the evolution of income inequality in every  country remains on the same path it has been  since 1980, the plateau in global inequality since  2000 will prove to be but a temporary blip: By  2050, the bottom half of the world's population  will draw only 9 percent of the world's income, a  percentage point less than today.  One-percenters at the top, by contrast, will reap  24 percent of the global income pie, up from 21  percent in 2016.
  But again, policy matters. Say countries  decide to push vigorously back against inequality  -- as vigorously as the European Union  pushed in the 36 years after 1980. In that case,  the world's income gap would even shrink a  little: by 2050, the bottom half would get 13  percent of the pie; the share of the top 1 percent  would shrink to 19 percent of the world's  income.  What we probably don't want the world to do  is follow the trajectory of inequality in the  United States. If it were to do that, by 2050 the  few at the top of the pyramid would be drawing  28 percent of global income. The bottom half  would get only about 6 percent.  This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print. 