John Kasich on the Issues
July 22, 2015 Wednesday
Gov. John Kasich of Ohio has announced his candidacy on Tuesday for the Republican presidential nomination. Known as a fiscal conservative during his nine terms in Congress, Mr. Kasich has recently taken more centrist positions, defending spending on social programs and noting his willingness to work with Democrats on immigration. Here are his positions on some important issues.
Foreign Policy 
  Mr. Kasich says the United States, as part of NATO, will  probably have to send combat troops to Iraq to battle the Islamic State. He calls himself a ''strong and emotional supporter of Israel,'' and returned to the House of Representatives in March for the first time in 15 years to attend Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu's address in which he criticized President Obama's efforts to reach a deal to curtail Iran's nuclear program. He supports providing arms to Ukraine to help it fight Russian-backed rebels, which Mr. Obama has resisted.
  Same-Sex Marriage
  Mr. Kasich said he believes in ''traditional marriage'' between a man and a woman. But after the Supreme Court recognized the right to same-sex marriage, he said it was ''time to move on'' rather than to seek a constitutional amendment to let states prohibit same-sex marriage, as some conservatives want.
  Immigration
  Mr. Kasich says he would consider granting legal status to those in the United States illegally if they registered and paid a fine. He has also generated criticism from fellow Republicans for saying he was open to considering Mr. Obama's plans for an immigration overhaul. ''We've got to look at broader immigration reform, because some people are waiting in line 25 years'' to come to the United States, he said this month.
  Environment
  Unlike many of his Republican rivals, Mr. Kasich believes that climate change is a problem. ''I don't want to overreact to it, I can't measure it all, but I respect the creation that the Lord has given us and I want to make sure we protect it,'' he said in 2012. But he criticized government intervention, particularly when it comes to regulating coal, a major Ohio industry, saying that ''to be unilaterally doing everything here while China and India are belching and putting us in a noncompetitive position isn't good.'' Recently, the United States reached an accord with China setting targets for reducing greenhouse-gas emissions.
  Education
  Mr. Kasich supports the Common Core set of national education standards meant to raise students' proficiency in math and English, which many conservatives have attacked as a federal government overreach. But he says that, in Ohio, ''those standards are set and the curriculum is set by local school boards.''
  Budget and the Economy
  Mr. Kasich broke with other conservative governors by accepting funds for the expansion of Medicaid under Mr. Obama's Affordable Care Act, though he said he opposed the law. The expansion made 275,000 Ohioans eligible for Medicaid. Mr. Kasich has in recent years defended the social safety net, taking issue with fellow Republicans who slash poverty programs. ''I'm concerned about the fact there seems to be a war on the poor,'' he said in 2013. He has pointed to his experience as a fiscal hawk as chairman of the House Budget Committee during the Clinton administration, when he proposed alternative budgets that cut federal spending, including military appropriations and entitlements like Medicaid. As Ohio governor, though, Mr. Kasich has emphasized his record of balancing budgets, cutting taxes and, most important, creating jobs -- though critics have said he partly benefited from an improving national economy.
  Find out what you need to know about the 2016 presidential race today, and get politics news updates via Facebook, Twitter and the First Draft newsletter.