The global economy's subdued recovery faces challenges, the World Bank says.
January 5, 2021 Tuesday 11:14 EST
The global economy faces a subdued recovery in 2021 as countries race to roll out coronavirus vaccines and businesses around the world try to emerge from pandemic lockdowns that have widened income inequality and piled on debt, the World Bank said on Tuesday.
The global economy will expand 4 percent in 2021 after contracting 4.3 percent last year, the World Bank projected in its Global Economic Prospects report. The bank described the nascent recovery as “fragile” and said that its trajectory would depend on the success of widespread vaccine distribution.
“While the global economy appears to have entered a subdued recovery, policymakers face formidable challenges — in public health, debt management, budget policies, central banking and structural reforms — as they try to ensure that this still fragile global recovery gains traction and sets a foundation for robust growth,” said David Malpass, the World Bank’s president.
•The bank projects that advanced economies will expand 3.3 percent this year after contracting 5.4 percent in 2020.
•Developing economies are projected to expand 5 percent after shrinking by 2.6 percent last year.
•The United States economy is expected to expand 3.5 percent this year, while in China, where the virus first emerged, the economy is projected to expand 7.9 percent.
The forecasts are based on the assumption that the rollout of the vaccine will be widespread by the middle of the year. However, if logistical problems arise or if people resist vaccinations, the global economy could expand at a much slower rate of 1.6 percent, the World Bank said.
The pandemic has cast millions of people into poverty as governments locked down their countries to contain the virus. As many as 150 million people are expected to be pushed into extreme poverty by this year, the World Bank said in October.
Policymakers will need to take steps to reverse the devastating increase in extreme poverty, Mr. Malpass said in a briefing on Tuesday. “It may take years for people at the bottom of the income scale to see a sustained improvement in their circumstances,” he said.
The World Bank has $12 billion to help countries coordinate vaccine distribution. The world economy faces an “Amber Alert” when it came to debt, Mr. Malpass said, and the bank will be working to help poor countries ease their debt burdens so that they can focus their resources on health care needs.