Sunday Dialogue: Lifting Kids Out of Poverty
December 22, 2013 Sunday
Readers discuss how to mirror our success with helping seniors.
To the Editor:
Are you tired of politicians who say ''our children are our most precious resource'' but vote to cut funding to feed kids and for early childhood development?
Representative Paul D. Ryan recently told me that he believed in the importance of early childhood education. Yet earlier this year he proposed a budget that would have maintained sequestration's cuts -- permanently eliminating Head Start slots for 57,000 children -- and cut another 20 percent from the Head Start budget, which by some estimates meant another 200,000 children would lose their slots.
I share Mr. Ryan's frustration that almost one in four children in America lives in poverty today, almost the same percentage as when President Lyndon B. Johnson declared the War on Poverty nearly 50 years ago, and appointed my father, Sargent Shriver, to lead it.
Mr. Ryan recently said the programs created under the War on Poverty -- including Head Start -- are ''bureaucratic, top-down'' programs that are ''wrecking families and communities.''
I have asked myself countless times if Dad's work was a fantastic waste of money. And I have asked myself if my own work fighting for poor kids over the last 26 years has been for naught.
When I visit Save the Children's programs in this country, I often leave discouraged. The kids are so far behind developmentally that by the time they reach kindergarten it's almost impossible for them to compete against middle-class American kids or kids from China.
But, consider this: Because of investments in Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security, the poverty rate for seniors dropped from 28 percent in 1966 to 9 percent today. At the same time, the poverty rate for children has increased, from 17 percent in 1966 to 22 percent today.
It's no coincidence that federal spending on seniors is seven times the spending on children. Head Start serves less than half the eligible population because of lack of money! The statistics for the elderly prove we know how to reduce poverty. We have chosen to invest in seniors, not in children. Why? Because seniors vote, give money to politicians and are politically organized.
Our children are losing the war because too many politicians say the right thing but don't have the political guts to do the right thing.
MARK K. SHRIVER Sr. Vice President, Strategic InitiativesSave the Children Washington, Dec. 16, 2013
Readers React
We're all too familiar with what happens to children living in poverty: Poor children are born into poor families and go on to have more poor children in an apparently never-ending generational cycle. Along with poverty come low achievement, school failure and a variety of other undesirable outcomes. But this cycle need not be repeated endlessly.
Research on children in more than 70 countries demonstrates that preschool enrollment can reduce income-based social, cognitive and achievement gaps among young children at risk. For every percentage point increase in preschool enrollment, the gap between high- and low-income children declines.
However, results like these require a commitment to start at birth, engage parents, train providers of care and create intensive preschool experiences over the first three years that are aligned with programs from preschool to grade 3.
The evidence is compelling. The question is whether we have the will to put into practice what we know.
SAMUEL J. MEISELS Omaha, Dec. 18, 2013
The writer is executive director of the Buffett Early Childhood Institute at the University of Nebraska.
Mr. Shriver's righteous indignation needs to get back on the main rail line from the detouring spur that he took when he embraces the Republican either-or mentality between the elderly and those mired in poverty.
That being said, taking a page out of the senior playbook by organizing the parents of those children eligible for Head Start services (as well as registering them to vote in the numbers that would offset their absence of influence-inducing monetary contributions to politicians) would create a tsunami of public opinion that even the Paul Ryans would not be able to resist.
History has amply demonstrated that most change starts from the bottom up, and that change comes from small groups of relentlessly determined people who know that in order to gain entrance to the House of Equality, one must not only knock on the front and back doors, but, if necessary, pry open a window, dig a tunnel or slide down the chimney.
MARC ROGERS Sherman Oaks, Calif., Dec. 18, 2013
Pediatricians from across the United States have mobilized to address the critical issue of childhood poverty. We know that poverty is ''toxic'' to children: toxic to their health and nutrition; toxic to early brain and child development, and toxic to their chances for school achievement and productive adult lives.
In 2012, the Academic Pediatric Association, or A.P.A., formed a Task Force on Childhood Poverty, bringing together leading pediatricians from the United States and Canada to advocate for the needs of children and families living in poverty. The American Academy of Pediatrics, or A.A.P., representing over 60,000 pediatricians, made ''poverty and child health'' its strategic priority starting in 2013.
We speak with one voice when we stress the importance of implementing early childhood programs, such as home visiting programs to help and mentor families with infants and young children, high-quality universal preschool and child care, and Reach Out and Read, for all low-income children in the United States.
Pediatricians do not view addressing childhood poverty as a partisan political issue. We expect Democrats and Republicans to share a desire to help children and safeguard our country's human capital and economic future.
We know what works. We know what to do. Let us join together to make this happen.
BENARD P. DREYER New York, Dec. 18, 2013
The writer, a professor of pediatrics at the New York University School of Medicine, is co-chairman of the A.P.A. Task Force on Childhood Poverty and co-chairman of the A.A.P. Public Policy and Advocacy Committee.
Mr. Shriver is right that we have chosen to invest in seniors rather than children. We've also chosen to invest in bailing out banks, insurance companies and automobile manufacturers rather than investing in children. Arguably, all the bailouts were done for good reasons. But our kids are an even better reason -- they just lack the political and financial power to command the attention of elected officials.
While Republicans like Representative Paul Ryan vote for budget cuts that hurt children, the timidity of most Democrats when it comes to talking about poverty has made it easier for such votes to take place.
The gap between what we know about what children need, and what we do to ensure that they get it, has grown larger than ever.
If our actions mirrored our rhetoric, rather than mocked it, we'd be reaping the long-term health, education and economic benefits of well-fed and well-educated American children.
BILL SHORE Chief Executive Share Our Strength Washington, Dec. 18, 2013
Mr. Shriver is right to highlight the scandal of worsening child poverty in the 50 years since Lyndon B. Johnson's declaration of a War on Poverty. And he's also on target in comparing our relative success in reducing poverty among seniors with the inexcusable failure to tackle poverty among the young. But it's important to bear in mind that the roots of America's dismaying levels of child poverty lie primarily in our neglectful treatment of adults.
Children are poor, after all, because their parents are poor. And their parents are poor because of some combination of lack of work, inadequate pay when they do work and minimal income support if they don't. We can't effectively address the poverty of children unless we tackle those structural deficits head-on.
Head Start and other early childhood intervention programs are surely important, and as Mr. Shriver notes, sorely underfunded. But even more generous support for those programs won't roll back the continuing social disaster of endemic joblessness, declining pay for low-wage work and relentless attacks on benefits for low-income Americans.
As long as we tolerate those conditions, we will continue to suffer the worst child poverty rates in the advanced industrial world. We have the economic resources to do better. The question, as Mr. Shriver suggests, is whether we have the political will.
ELLIOTT CURRIE Irvine, Calif., Dec. 18, 2013
The writer is a professor of criminology, law and society at the University of California, Irvine.
I was in my 20s when Medicare was passed. I was in favor; I remember arguing with some friends who were opposed that we needed decent health care for older people. Now I am one.
I pay for my Medicare, but I can and am willing to pay more. But children who are ill nourished and poorly educated break my heart, and I fear for our future.
If it takes Head Start from six months of age; if it takes Medicare for all; if it takes more food stamps, let's do it! Don't yak about how can we afford it. The question is: how can we afford not to?
I don't want to see the United States roiled in mediocrity because its people are not educated properly and not in great health. Actually, I won't see it. I'll be dead, but how about the rest of you?
CAROL S. FRIEL Cincinnati, Dec. 18, 2013
Mr. Shriver is saying the obvious, and it is sad that it has to be said. But it is all part of a bigger picture in which self-reliance and the frontier spirit of our country's history is taken to such an extreme that it drowns out the voices of community and compassion and the American tradition of helping one another.
It is a picture in which income extremes are at toxic levels so that a decent minimum wage cannot be passed and it is politically impossible to ask billionaires to pay their fair share of taxes, partly because politicians depend on their huge contributions to get elected. This is a time when government is considered the enemy rather than of the people, by the people, for the people. It is a time when taxes are no longer seen as the price of civilization, but an unfair imposition.
Children cannot pull themselves up by their bootstraps, especially when they do not even have shoes or a warm winter coat or a functioning family, when they don't come to school ready to learn because of a lack of preschool opportunities. We must repair our safety nets and make it possible for all children to reach their full potentials.
It is not either senior citizens or children, but both. It takes the whole village working together.
INA ARONOW New Rochelle, N.Y., Dec. 18, 2013
Mark Shriver should be assured that the work of his father, Sargent Shriver, lifted millions out of poverty and to a better life -- in the '60s, yes, but also to this day. But I share his frustration. After 45 years of working on kids' issues, I've not seen such political indifference, even hostility, to helping children.
Conservative belief that private-sector market forces, on their own, will spread our economy's benefits to all, poor children included, should have been shattered in the 2008 Wall Street debacle. No. Conservatives still want repeal of Obamacare, deep cuts in nutrition, no minimum-wage increases and shredding of a weakened social safety net -- raising child poverty to levels unseen in rich democracies.
Part of the answer to fighting child poverty is in your editorial ''Why Other Countries Teach Better,'' printed on the same page as Mr. Shriver's letter. Listing reasons for Finland's success, you note that all schools are for wealthy and poor alike, and include hot meals, health services and family programs. Yes, Finns pay higher taxes, and investing in kids is redistributing income. They also have less crime, low teenage births, more success in school and less child poverty -- true also in other rich democracies.
President Lyndon B. Johnson and Sargent Shriver proved that we could lift children and families from poverty. Other presidents and Congresses, Democratic and Republican alike, have believed the same. Without today's conservative leaders rejoining the fight, millions of children face a grim future.
MICHAEL PETIT President Every Child Matters Washington, Dec. 18, 2013
The Writer Responds
I appreciate, though disagree with, Mr. Rogers's constructive criticism that my argument ''embraces the Republican either-or mentality between the elderly and those mired in poverty.''
I did not intend to make this simply an either-or argument between seniors and children. The same president that launched Head Start also started Medicare. I am not for children and therefore against seniors. I admire the progress that has been made for and by seniors -- in fact, I am jealous!
Why is it, though, that we know what to do to address childhood poverty, as Professor Dreyer writes, just as we know what to do to address senior poverty, but we don't act on behalf of kids?
I share Professor Dreyer's view that childhood poverty isn't a ''partisan political issue'' and his expectation that Democrats and Republicans should share ''a desire to help children.'' But Bill Shore is correct that politicians in both parties have made kids less of a priority than seniors, banks, insurance companies and auto manufacturers, to name just a few.
It's imperative to heed the call from Proverbs 31: ''Speak up for those who cannot speak for themselves, for the rights of all who are destitute. Speak up and judge fairly; defend the rights of the poor and needy.''
Until kids and those who advocate on their behalf -- including Bill Shore, Michael Petit, Samuel J. Meisels and me -- get better politically organized and hold political leaders accountable at the ballot box, change is not going to happen.
MARK K. SHRIVER Washington, Dec. 20, 2013