Top U.N. Official Warns of Coal Risks
November 19, 2013 Tuesday
WARSAW -- Most of the world's coal needs to stay in the ground if greenhouse gas emissions are to be held in check, the United Nations' top climate change official said Monday in a speech to coal industry executives here in Poland, one of the most coal-dependent nations on Earth.
Christiana Figueres, executive secretary of the United National Framework Convention on Climate Change, told industry officials here that they were putting the global climate and their shareholders at risk by failing to support the search for alternative methods of producing energy.
''Let me be clear from the outset that my joining you today is neither a tacit approval of coal use, nor is it a call for the immediate disappearance of coal,'' Ms. Figueres said at an industry conference timed to coincide with the annual meeting of the United Nations climate body. ''But I am here to say that coal must change rapidly and dramatically for everyone's sake.''
Ms. Figures reminded the executives that the 195 members of the United Nations climate treaty agreed in 2010 to hold the rise in global temperatures to below 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, or 2 degrees Celsius, from preindustrial levels, and she said that continuing along the current path would make reaching that target impossible.
Ignoring that mandate, she said, poses a ''business continuation risk'' to the coal industry that it cannot afford to ignore. ''Like any other industry, you have a fiduciary responsibility to your work force and shareholders,'' she said. ''And by now it is abundantly clear that further capital expenditures on coal can only go ahead if they are compatible with the 2 degree Celsius limit.''
Ms. Figueres was speaking at the World Coal Summit, called somewhat incongruously by the Polish government to run at the same time as the 19th meeting of the United Nations climate conference. Poland relies on coal for more than 88 percent of its electricity, and the government has roiled the European mainstream by spurning efforts to slow the use of the fuel.
Godfrey G. Gomwe, chairman of the World Coal Association's energy and climate committee, responded in a speech that, with ''1.3 billion people in the world who live without access to electricity,'' the questions of climate change and poverty reduction could not be separated.
''A life lived without access to modern energy is a life lived in poverty,'' said Mr. Gomwe, who is also chief executive of the mining company Anglo American's thermal coal business. ''As much as some may wish it, coal is not going away.''
The answer to coal's carbon pollution problem, Mr. Gomwe said, was investment in higher efficiency plants to reduce emissions, with the developed world helping poorer countries if needed.
Environmentalists criticized the very existence of the coal summit. Alden Meyer, director of strategy and policy at the Union of Concerned Scientists, an American advocacy group, called the summit ''a distraction.''
''The summit's focus on continued reliance on coal is directly counter to the goal of these climate negotiations,'' Mr. Meyer said in a statement, ''which is to dramatically reduce emissions of heat-trapping gases in order to avoid the worst impacts of climate change. Every year countries come together at these negotiations to find a global solution to climate change, and yet our host is embracing a chief cause of the problem.''
Delegates to the United Nations conference began meeting here last week to chart the road toward a global agreement, planned for a 2015 meeting in Paris, to replace the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which technically expired last year. Discussions are focusing on the details of process, as well as the thorny questions of how the developed world can help poor countries cope with a warming planet, both financially and technologically, and questions of historical responsibility for global warming.
The climate meeting draws thousands of delegates and activists, who use it as a forum for networking and criticizing countries they consider barriers to an enforceable global treaty. In a departure from recent climate meetings, the Americans are not being portrayed as among the chief villains, in part because President Obama appears sincerely committed to reining in greenhouse gases and helping poorer countries adapt. Environmentalists' wrath is now more directed at Japan and Australia, who are seen as backtracking on earlier climate-friendly policies.
Japan on Friday retreated from its previous emissions target, saying that the loss of its nuclear power base in the wake of the Fukushima Daiichi catastrophe had caused it to revise its outlook for clean energy production.
Australia, meanwhile, has taken an increasingly cool approach to the question of global warming, keeping its environment minister home to work on legislation to repeal a carbon tax enacted by the previous government.
''All the Americans have to do is stand next to the Australians and Japanese, and in the current climate, they appear as the leaders,'' Ria Voorhaar, a spokeswoman for the Climate Action Network, an alliance of environmental organizations, said.
Separately, in Beijing on Monday, the president of China, Xi Jinping, told former President Bill Clinton that climate change policy and energy were among the areas where their two countries should cooperate more, the official Chinese news agency, Xinhua, reported.
''With the shared efforts of successive leaders of both countries, Sino-U.S. relations have been built into a skyscraper,'' Mr. Xi told Mr. Clinton. ''Both our sides must continue our efforts, and add building blocks to Sino-U.S. relations.''
Mr. Xi said: ''Our two sides have been enhancing cooperation in politics, economics and trade, at a people-to-people level, and in other areas, and we should respond together to challenges such as climate change and energy security.''